# NATSUSTAIN-24020996B
Model codes used to process and extract data on rainfall, maximum temperature, rainfall volume, and deforestation. These codes also include statistical analyses as presented in the manuscript 'Intensification of climate change impacts on the Cerrado agriculture due to deforestation' (Leite-Filho et al., 2024, Nature Communications).

Climate anomalies due to forest native vegetation loss: To identify the deforestation signal on the onset of the agricultural rainy season (O′i,j,t), rainfall volume (R′i,j,t) and maximum temperature (Tmax′i,j,t) in each crop season, we had to remove the influence of geographic location, elevation and interannual variability (the latter due to large-scale climate mechanisms). We adopted a four-step process based on [20] (Fig. S5) to determine anomalies and to assess our detrending method's effectiveness. Our methodology includes the following steps: (1) using machine learning algorithms to model climate variability across the Brazilian Cerrado, (2) evaluating model accuracy, (3) applying a detrending procedure to remove trends related to other factors than deforestation, and (4) validating the detrending process to ensure its reliability. Each step is explained in detail in Section S1.6. 

Soybean and maize yield residuals: the calculation of the Soybean and maize yield residuals is needed to eliminate the influence of other factors, such as technological advancements, which could bias our analyses. To achieve this, we calculated soybean and second-crop maize yield residuals using a three-step procedure (Section S1.8). Firstly, we applied generalized additive models (GAM) [29] to fit mathematical equations to the historical series of each grid cell as a function of time. Soybean and maize yields (Yst and Ymt, in kg/ha) were the dependent variables, and time (t, in years) was the independent variable. Here, we assume that the yields follow a Poisson distribution. This is based on the consideration that the probability of a series of events occurring over a specific period is calculated assuming that these events are independent of the time of the last event. In the second step, the angular coefficients of the fitted equations were used to estimate the yield values (̂Yst 𝑒 ̂Ymt), representing the trend for Yst and Ymt. In the third step, we subtracted the fitted yield values from the observed values (Equations 2, 3).  
